README.md, before:

<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![Contributors][contributors-shield]][contributors-url]
[![Forks][forks-shield]][forks-url]
[![Stargazers][stars-shield]][stars-url]
[![Issues][issues-shield]][issues-url]
[![MIT License][license-shield]][license-url]
[![LinkedIn][linkedin-shield]][linkedin-url]



<!-- PROJECT logo -->
<br />
<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper">
    <img src="images/sandpiper1-01.png" alt="Logo" width="50%" height="50%">
  </a>

  <h3 align="center">- Tools for automatic UAV-SfM beach volumetric and behavioural analysis -</h3>

  <p align="justify">
    Sandpiper performs an organised and automatic extraction of elevation profiles from as many DSM and orthophotos as you like. It is thought to be used when a considerable number of DSMs and orthohpotos from many different locations and coordinate reference systems need to be processed.
    Then, computes volumetric and behavioural analysis of beachfaces, speeding up an otherwise long and difficult to handle (big rasters) job.
    It has some specialised functions to deal with the common limitations found in beach environments:
  <ol>
    <li>Swash zone: the water motion as waves wash in and out of the swash zone prevent Structure from Motion algorithm to find matches, thus, model elevation.</li>
    <li>Vegetation: both dune vegetation and beach wracks (macroalgae, woody debris) should be removed or filetered as can compromise sediment volumetric computation.</li>
    <li>File size: a few km long beach surveyed with a Phantom 4-Advanced at 100m altitude create roughly 10 Gb (uncompressed) of data, which can be cumbersome for some GIS to handle.</li>
  </ol>
  
  From user-defined cross-shore transects, you can clean profiles from unwanted non-sand points, detect significant hotspots/coldspots (cluster) of beach change, compute       volumetric dynamics at the site and transect levels, plot alongshore change and model beachface behaviour using the Beachface Cluster Dynamics indices.
  
  Plus, some outils functions that can come at hand, like automatic transect creation from a vector line, grid creation along a line and subsequent tiles extraction and others.
  
  Follow the Jupyter Notebook tutorials (IN PREPARATION) to understand how it works!
  
  >**This code has supported the analysis and publication of the article ["Citizen science for monitoring seasonal-scale beach erosion and behaviour with aerial drones"](https://rdcu.be/cfgvu  "link to paper"), in the open access Nature Scientific Report journal.**


  <br />
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper"><strong>Explore the docs »</strong></a>
  <br />
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper">View Demo</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues">Report Bug</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues">Request Feature</a>
  </p>
</p>



<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details open="open">
  <summary><h2 style="display: inline-block">Table of Contents</h2></summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#about-the-project">About The Project</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#Background">Background</a></li>
        <li><a href="#Modules">Modules</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#prerequisites">Prerequisites</a></li>
        <li><a href="#Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)">Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#usage">Usage</a></li>
    <li><a href="#roadmap">Roadmap</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contributing">Contributing</a></li>
    <li><a href="#license">License</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contact">Contact</a></li>
    <li><a href="#publications">Publications</a></li>
    <li><a href="#acknowledgements">Acknowledgements</a></li>
   
  </ol>
</details>



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## About The Project

<img src="images/banner3.png" alt="banner" width="100%" height="50%">

<!-- Background -->
### Background
This code has been developed to ease the analysis of big data coming from more than 300 Unnmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) surveys, performed by Citizen Scientist in Victoria, Australia. This is the [Eureka Award Winning](https://www.deakin.edu.au/about-deakin/media-releases/articles/eureka-prize-win-for-world-first-citizen-science-program) World-first [beach monitoring program powered by volunteers](https://www.marinemapping.org/vcmp-citizen-science "info on the Citizen Science project"), who autonomously fly UAVs on 15 sensitive sites (erosional hotspots) across the Victorian coast, every 6 weeks for 3 years, since 2018. This project is part of a broader marine mapping program called The [Victorian Coastal Monitoring Program (VCMP)](https://www.marineandcoasts.vic.gov.au/coastal-programs/victorian-coastal-monitoring-program "VCMP website"), funded by the [Victorian Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning](https://www.delwp.vic.gov.au/ "DELWP website"), co-funded by [Deakin University](https://www.deakin.edu.au/ "Deakin Uni website") and [The University of Melbourne](https://www.unimelb.edu.au/ "UniMelb website").

Each survey creates Digital Surface Models and orthophotos of considerable size (5-10 Gb uncompressed), which can be troublesome for some GIS to render, let alone perform rster-based computations.

<!-- modules -->
### Modules

* **.outils**: main storage of useful functions.
* **.profile**: extract elevation and colour information across profiles from a folder of rasters.
* **.labels**: use KMean and Silhouette analysis to help clean the extracted elevation data from unwanted non-sand points.
* **.hotspot**: use Local Moran's I to disscard spatial outliers and obtain significant hot/cold spots of beach change at site and transect levels.
* **.dynamics**: compute Beachface CLuster Dynamics indices at the site and transect levels.
* **.volumetrics**: compute volumetric timeseries of sand-only points and create plots.
* **.space** (under development): simple satellite and UAV instantaneous waterlines tidal-correction and shoreline shifts/error metrics.



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

To get a local copy up and running follow these simple steps.

### Prerequisites
[Install Conda] in your local machine and use the [sandpiper_env.yml file](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/blob/master/sandpiper_env.yml) to create a suitable environment (will be named "sandpiper_env").
* in the Anaconda Prompt terminal, type:
  ```sh
  conda env create --file sandpiper_env.yml
  ```
  > The [richdem](https://pypi.org/project/richdem/ "richdem pypi page") package is the only one installed by PIP, which might cause an error.
  > If this is the case:
  > 1. Remove the attempted environment `conda remove --name sandpiper_env --all`
  > 2. Open sandpiper_env.yml and remove **richdem** from the requirement list, but leave **pip**
  > 3. Re-create the environment with the modified sandpiper_env.yml file `conda env create --file sandpiper_env.yml`
  > 4. Once created, activate the environment and `pip install richdem`

### Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)

1. Locate the **site-package** folder inside the sandpiper_env folder created by Conda and clone the repo inside that.
  
  >**Example**: C:\conda3\envs\sandpiper_env\Lib\site-packages
  >
   Type in conda prompt:
   ```sh
   cd C:\conda3\envs\sandpiper_env\Lib\site-packages
   git clone https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper.git
   ```
2. Once you open a Jupyter Notebook with the sandpiper_env, import it to test it works.
   ```sh
   import sandpiper
   ```

<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
## Usage

TO DO.

_For more examples, please refer to the [Documentation](https://example.com)_



<!-- ROADMAP -->
## Roadmap

See the [open issues](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues) for a list of proposed features (and known issues).



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open source community such an amazing place to be learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request



<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE` for more information.



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Nicolas Pucino - [@NicolasPucino](https://twitter.com/@NicolasPucino) - npucino@deakin.edu.au

Project Link: [https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper)


<!-- Publications -->
## Publications

* [Pucino, N. et al. Citizen science for monitoring seasonal-scale beach erosion and behaviour with aerial drones. Sci. Rep. 11, 1-19 (2021)](https://rdcu.be/cfgvu)

<!-- ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS -->
## Acknowledgements

* [Funding provided by Deakin University and the Victorian Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning](https://www.marineandcoasts.vic.gov.au/coastal-programs/victorian-coastal-monitoring-program)
* [Deakin University Citizen Science program webpage](https://www.marinemapping.org/vcmp-citizen-science)
* [A/Prof Daniel Ierodiaconou](https://www.deakin.edu.au/about-deakin/people/daniel-ierodiaconou), my PhD supervisor and the [Deakin Marine Mapping team](https://www.marinemapping.org/)






<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/blob/master/LICENSE.txt
[linkedin-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/-LinkedIn-black.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&colorB=555
[linkedin-url]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nicolaspucino/

[Install Conda]:https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual "Anaconda download website"

Commit message:

updated prerequisite with clean environment guidlines

README.md, after:

<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![Contributors][contributors-shield]][contributors-url]
[![Forks][forks-shield]][forks-url]
[![Stargazers][stars-shield]][stars-url]
[![Issues][issues-shield]][issues-url]
[![MIT License][license-shield]][license-url]
[![LinkedIn][linkedin-shield]][linkedin-url]



<!-- PROJECT logo -->
<br />
<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper">
    <img src="images/sandpiper1-01.png" alt="Logo" width="50%" height="50%">
  </a>

  <h3 align="center">- Tools for automatic UAV-SfM beach volumetric and behavioural analysis -</h3>

  <p align="justify">
    Sandpiper performs an organised and automatic extraction of elevation profiles from as many DSM and orthophotos as you like. It is thought to be used when a considerable number of DSMs and orthohpotos from many different locations and coordinate reference systems need to be processed.
    Then, computes volumetric and behavioural analysis of beachfaces, speeding up an otherwise long and difficult to handle (big rasters) job.
    It has some specialised functions to deal with the common limitations found in beach environments:
  <ol>
    <li>Swash zone: the water motion as waves wash in and out of the swash zone prevent Structure from Motion algorithm to find matches, thus, model elevation.</li>
    <li>Vegetation: both dune vegetation and beach wracks (macroalgae, woody debris) should be removed or filetered as can compromise sediment volumetric computation.</li>
    <li>File size: a few km long beach surveyed with a Phantom 4-Advanced at 100m altitude create roughly 10 Gb (uncompressed) of data, which can be cumbersome for some GIS to handle.</li>
  </ol>
  
  From user-defined cross-shore transects, you can clean profiles from unwanted non-sand points, detect significant hotspots/coldspots (cluster) of beach change, compute       volumetric dynamics at the site and transect levels, plot alongshore change and model beachface behaviour using the Beachface Cluster Dynamics indices.
  
  Plus, some outils functions that can come at hand, like automatic transect creation from a vector line, grid creation along a line and subsequent tiles extraction and others.
  
  Follow the Jupyter Notebook tutorials (IN PREPARATION) to understand how it works!
  
  >**This code has supported the analysis and publication of the article ["Citizen science for monitoring seasonal-scale beach erosion and behaviour with aerial drones"](https://rdcu.be/cfgvu  "link to paper"), in the open access Nature Scientific Report journal.**


  <br />
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper"><strong>Explore the docs »</strong></a>
  <br />
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper">View Demo</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues">Report Bug</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues">Request Feature</a>
  </p>
</p>



<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details open="open">
  <summary><h2 style="display: inline-block">Table of Contents</h2></summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#about-the-project">About The Project</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#Background">Background</a></li>
        <li><a href="#Modules">Modules</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#prerequisites">Prerequisites</a></li>
        <li><a href="#Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)">Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#usage">Usage</a></li>
    <li><a href="#roadmap">Roadmap</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contributing">Contributing</a></li>
    <li><a href="#license">License</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contact">Contact</a></li>
    <li><a href="#publications">Publications</a></li>
    <li><a href="#acknowledgements">Acknowledgements</a></li>
   
  </ol>
</details>



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## About The Project

<img src="images/banner3.png" alt="banner" width="100%" height="50%">

<!-- Background -->
### Background
This code has been developed to ease the analysis of big data coming from more than 300 Unnmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) surveys, performed by Citizen Scientist in Victoria, Australia. This is the [Eureka Award Winning](https://www.deakin.edu.au/about-deakin/media-releases/articles/eureka-prize-win-for-world-first-citizen-science-program) World-first [beach monitoring program powered by volunteers](https://www.marinemapping.org/vcmp-citizen-science "info on the Citizen Science project"), who autonomously fly UAVs on 15 sensitive sites (erosional hotspots) across the Victorian coast, every 6 weeks for 3 years, since 2018. This project is part of a broader marine mapping program called The [Victorian Coastal Monitoring Program (VCMP)](https://www.marineandcoasts.vic.gov.au/coastal-programs/victorian-coastal-monitoring-program "VCMP website"), funded by the [Victorian Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning](https://www.delwp.vic.gov.au/ "DELWP website"), co-funded by [Deakin University](https://www.deakin.edu.au/ "Deakin Uni website") and [The University of Melbourne](https://www.unimelb.edu.au/ "UniMelb website").

Each survey creates Digital Surface Models and orthophotos of considerable size (5-10 Gb uncompressed), which can be troublesome for some GIS to render, let alone perform rster-based computations.

<!-- modules -->
### Modules

* **.outils**: main storage of useful functions.
* **.profile**: extract elevation and colour information across profiles from a folder of rasters.
* **.labels**: use KMean and Silhouette analysis to help clean the extracted elevation data from unwanted non-sand points.
* **.hotspot**: use Local Moran's I to disscard spatial outliers and obtain significant hot/cold spots of beach change at site and transect levels.
* **.dynamics**: compute Beachface CLuster Dynamics indices at the site and transect levels.
* **.volumetrics**: compute volumetric timeseries of sand-only points and create plots.
* **.space** (under development): simple satellite and UAV instantaneous waterlines tidal-correction and shoreline shifts/error metrics.



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

To get a local copy up and running follow these simple steps.

### Prerequisites
[Install Conda] in your local machine and use the to create a suitable virtual environment (here named **"sandpiper_env"**).
* in the Anaconda Prompt terminal, type:
  ```sh
  conda create --name sandpiper_env geopandas tqdm pysal scikit-learn scikit-image rasterio scipy seaborn matplotlib
  ```
  
* then, install Visual Studio 14 package, which is needed to install the [richdem](https://pypi.org/project/richdem/ "richdem pypi page") package.
```sh
conda install -c ukoethe visual-studio
```
* now, let's PIP install richdem, type:
 ```sh
 pip install richdem
 ```
 For the exact packages versions, consult the [sandpiper_env.yml file](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/blob/master/sandpiper_env.yml).

### Installation (temporary - will be a package in PyPI)

1. Locate the **site-package** folder inside the sandpiper_env folder created by Conda and clone the repo inside that.
  
  >**Example**: C:\conda3\envs\sandpiper_env\Lib\site-packages
  >
   Type in conda prompt:
   ```sh
   cd C:\conda3\envs\sandpiper_env\Lib\site-packages
   git clone https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper.git
   ```
2. Once you open a Jupyter Notebook with the sandpiper_env, import it to test it works.
   ```sh
   import sandpiper
   ```

<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
## Usage

TO DO.

_For more examples, please refer to the [Documentation](https://example.com)_



<!-- ROADMAP -->
## Roadmap

See the [open issues](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues) for a list of proposed features (and known issues).



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open source community such an amazing place to be learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request



<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE` for more information.



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Nicolas Pucino - [@NicolasPucino](https://twitter.com/@NicolasPucino) - npucino@deakin.edu.au

Project Link: [https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper](https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper)


<!-- Publications -->
## Publications

* [Pucino, N. et al. Citizen science for monitoring seasonal-scale beach erosion and behaviour with aerial drones. Sci. Rep. 11, 1-19 (2021)](https://rdcu.be/cfgvu)

<!-- ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS -->
## Acknowledgements

* [Funding provided by Deakin University and the Victorian Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning](https://www.marineandcoasts.vic.gov.au/coastal-programs/victorian-coastal-monitoring-program)
* [Deakin University Citizen Science program webpage](https://www.marinemapping.org/vcmp-citizen-science)
* [A/Prof Daniel Ierodiaconou](https://www.deakin.edu.au/about-deakin/people/daniel-ierodiaconou), my PhD supervisor and the [Deakin Marine Mapping team](https://www.marinemapping.org/)






<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/npucino/sandpiper.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/npucino/sandpiper/blob/master/LICENSE.txt
[linkedin-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/-LinkedIn-black.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&colorB=555
[linkedin-url]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nicolaspucino/

[Install Conda]:https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual "Anaconda download website"
